Discomfort glare in outdoor environments after dark – a review of methods, measures, and models
By Yulia Tyukhova, PhD 
(Independent Researcher, USA)

Abstract
There is no widely accepted discomfort glare metric for stationary or slow-moving observers in outdoor spaces after dark. This review provides background of 16 relevant discomfort glare models that exist in outdoor environments at night for observers, residents, and pedestrians, for small sources, and non-uniform sources. It includes relevant models and measures comparison studies for this application. It covers general research methods that study discomfort glare – psychophysical, physiological, and behavioral, and model development methods – empirical and visual system-based. The paper discusses the measurement difficulties of glare-relevant parameters in the field and future needs. Recommendations for future research directions and steps forward are offered. 

Key words
	Discomfort glare, outdoor environments after dark, glare measures and models, glare measurement, glare methodology

	Introduction 
Two main effects of glare are discomfort and disability (CIE 2020, IES 2022). Disability glare impairs visibility or visual performance without necessarily causing discomfort. Discomfort glare is glare that causes discomfort without necessarily impairing the vision of objects (CIE 2020). As compared to disability glare, discomfort glare is harder to grasp and is typically described as a sensation of annoyance or pain from a high-luminance glare source in the field of view. While underlying mechanisms for disability glare are well understood, for discomfort glare they are not. 
 
Figure 1. Discomfort glare experience.
There are three major components in experiencing discomfort glare (Figure 1). The first one is ‘a physical stimulus in a visual scene’ – the set of measurable photometric and geometric quantities that characterize the glare source and its environment. Also referred to as ‘glare excitation’ (Girard et al. 2023) or ‘glare potential’ (Allan et al. 2019), its computation holds for any observer in any condition. Most common factors that affect the perception of discomfort glare are the luminance and size of the glare source, its position (often described with the angle between the line of sight and the source), and the background or adaptation luminance (Figure 2). Then there is ‘glare sensation’ – the physiological response in the visual system of the observer caused by the physical stimulus. And the third major component of glare experience is ‘glare perception and recognition’ – the interpretation of the sensation by the brain that depends on the psychological aspects, preferences, and prior knowledge. Both psychophysical and physiological approaches are important for understanding a perceptual process – they provide information about different aspects of the process (Goldstein 2014).   
 
Figure 2. Main factors that affect the experience of discomfort glare.

Discomfort glare has a negative effect on the comfort and pleasantness experience by pedestrians and residents, which in turn affects fatigue, performance, and alertness (Van Bommel 2015). Outdoor environments for pedestrians and residents after dark are characterized by the following (Figure 3, left): 
- Low luminance background. High contrast between low-luminance backgrounds (e.g. road surface after dark) and bright light sources (e.g. Light Emitting Diodes (LEDs)) make it especially challenging to minimize glare in outdoor nighttime environments. Individual LED chips can achieve very high luminances – above 13·106 cd/m2 – much higher than the preceding sources (Tyukhova and Waters 2014, Slominski 2016). Although bare LEDs are rarely used, they are still very bright even when fitted with optical elements (e.g. Miller et al. 2013, Kohko et al. 2015, Villa et al. 2017a).
- Multiple sources in the field of view.
- Small source size. In outdoor environments an observer can encounter anything from a pedestrian-scale luminaire with visible non-uniformity while walking in the park to a small source seen from a large distance from their property.
- Low pole heights (e.g. Kostic and Djokic 2014). Non-uniformity of LEDs becomes more apparent in pedestrian-scale applications as opposed to streetlighting (Miller and McGowan 2015). LED luminaires have an array of numerous small bright LEDs (matrix, linear or staggered patterns) with a more pronounced non-uniform spatial luminance distribution over the light-emitting area (referred to as non-uniform sources, Figure 3 right) as compared to the conventional light sources. These sources with high luminance contrasts cause more discomfort glare than uniform sources when the average luminance of the glare source is kept constant (e.g. Geerdinck et al. 2014, Yang et al. 2017a, Tashiro et al. 2015). The larger the non-uniformity, the higher the glare with the biggest observable difference at the foveal view (CIE 2019a).  
- Variable gaze allocation of the observers. In contrast to drivers whose main direction of view is towards the road in front of them (Winter et al. 2017), pedestrians, stationary observers, and residents have the direction of view that is not fixed (Davoudian and Rayman 2012, Fotios et al. 2015). 
- Moving observers. Pedestrians experience their environment in a dynamic way while walking along a path.  
     
Figure 3. Left – a glaring LED luminaire in a footpath; Right – A non-uniform source with parameters that might influence glare perception and may depend on the viewing distance to the source, position in the field of view, type of task, and background luminance.

There is a substantial need in establishing a practical discomfort glare model that can be used by professionals for glare prediction and assessment for subsequent reduction of glare in a lighting installation and improvement of its quality. In general, a glare model is a mathematical model that uses photometric, geometric and in some cases physiological inputs from the visual scene with a glare source, and outputs a subjective perception of glare on a scale. Many models exist, but none are accepted for pedestrian and resident application in outdoor nighttime environments. 
Several review studies have been published – on daylighting and lighting factors that influence the perception of discomfort glare (Pierson et al. 2018, Carlucci et al. 2015), non-uniform sources in interiors (CIE 2019a), discomfort glare in road and vehicle lighting (CIE 2021), and discomfort glare methodology (Fotios and Kent 2021), but none for this application. Glare issues with urban LED luminaires for pedestrians and residents, and the variety of potentially relevant glare models is the primary drive for conducting this review. Other vulnerable users of the urban space after dark such as cyclists can also be considered with the current knowledge accounting for a different visual task as compared to pedestrians and residents. While the focus of this review is outdoor environments after dark for pedestrians and residents, many conclusions on the lighting factors, glare models and measures, model development, methodology and measurement of discomfort glare are the same regardless of the application. 
The sources for this review include papers from journals such as Leukos, Lighting Research and Technology, Building and Environment; the IES and CIE reports, relevant lighting books and theses based on the keywords shown at the beginning of this article and the snowballing search method. This article provides critical review of relevant research that is key to proposing steps forward with the goal of accepting a glare model for this application. First, methods to study discomfort glare are discussed. Next methods for model development and background on discomfort glare models for uniform and then non-uniform sources in outdoor nighttime environments is summarized in chronological order with further details in the Appendix. Comparison studies of different models and measures are covered next. Then the measurement of glare-related parameters in real-world scenes is covered to highlight model implementation issues, followed by a discussion of future research needs. Finally, the article concludes with a summary of findings and proposed steps for future research.

	Methods of studying discomfort glare
	Discomfort glare has been mostly studied with 3 methods – (1) psychophysical, (2) physiological, and (3) behavioral (Figure 4). In each method the physical stimulus and the visual scene are characterized by geometric and photometric measurements. The responses are measured by collecting subjective data by one of the 4 methods (section 2.1) or by collecting objective physiological and/or behavioral data (section 2.2) in addition to the subjective data. The goal of these approaches is to understand the complex relationships between a visual scene with stimuli, sensation, and perception and building a model that can be used for glare prediction and reduction in lighting installations.  
Figure 4. Methods of studying discomfort glare 

2.1 Psychophysical assessment of discomfort glare 
	Most discomfort glare studies are completed with the psychophysical approach – a quantitative method that measures the relationship between stimuli and a human response (Goldstein 2014). Four psychophysical methods are used for glare assessments (CIE 2014, Fotios and Kent 2021): 
	Rating – participants assess the discomfort presented when observing a single scene using a multipoint rating scale (e.g. the 9-point De Boer scale (De Boer and Schreuder 1967)). 
	Adjustment – participants adjust the amount of light for an individual lighting condition to meet some criterion/multiple criteria (e.g. Borderline between Comfort and Discomfort (BCD) (Luckiesh and Guth 1949)).  
	Discrimination/paired comparison – participants answer which of two scenes causes more discomfort, with the two scenes presented side by side or one after the other (e.g. Waters et al. 1995). 
	Matching – participants adjust luminance to match the second (reference) lighting condition (e.g. Luckiesh and Holladay 1925, Luckiesh and Guth 1949).  

The rating and the adjustment methods are among the two most used methods for discomfort glare assessment (Fotios and Kent 2021). The most frequently used glare scale in outdoor nighttime environments is the De Boer scale (Figure 5 left) with different variations of the scale labels. The scale, however, has a few problems – it is confusing for subjects such as higher numbers mean less glare; labels are ambiguous that might be misinterpreted by the observers; and there is no zero descriptor that indicates no discomfort glare and forces observers to give a rating to a potentially non-glary situation (e.g. Fotios 2015, Tyukhova 2015, Tyukhova and Waters 2018, Allan et al. 2019, Fotios 2019, Fotios and Kent 2021). Many other types of scales are used (e.g. Hopkinson 1940), but there is no consensus on a scale for discomfort glare studies (e.g. Sawicki and Wolska 2016).  
A two-step scale has been recently proposed (Sweater Hickcox et al. 2022), however, similar scales have been used before (e.g. Donners et al. 2015). First, the observers assess whether they are experiencing glare (yes/no), and only if the answer is ‘yes’, they indicate the amount of discomfort on a 6-point scale (Figure 5 right). It has not yet been validated against the performance of other scales. Quek and others (2023) investigated multiple questionnaire items on 3 independent studies to see if the choice of scale affects the distribution of user responses. Even though they did not test this two-step scale directly, their simulation of this method showed that even if observers say ‘no glare’ on a single ‘yes/no’ question this does not always correspond to the null response on the scales with more labels. This may lead to ‘non-response’ errors that change the distribution of the responses to the second question (category rating with multiple labels). Development and/or validation of a robust scale warrants its own research studies.  
 
Figure 5. Example of scales Left – Scale of discomfort glare appraisal (G) from De Boer and Schreuder (1967) – intermediate steps are allowed; Right – Two-step scale (Sweater Hickox et al. 2022)
The difficulty of studying glare comes from the fact that the cause of discomfort glare is not known, and human responses are characterized by a lot of individual variability (e.g. Stone 1973, Bennett 1977, Bennett 1979a, Paul and Einhorn 1999). The responses also depend on the cognitive load and attention (e.g. presence of the visual task (Kent et al .2019a)). Observers describe discomfort glare as glare that causes them to look away, inducing irritation, fatigue or even headaches after a prolonged exposure, eye symptoms and discomfort (e.g. Mork et al. 2020). It is critical to follow rigorous methodology, data collection and careful analysis to establish a reliable relationship between physical stimuli and human responses.  
Several papers highlight best practices for doing discomfort glare and other lighting research with a psychophysical method. Subjective measurements should meet important considerations such as quality of the questions and response measures (Fotios and Kent 2021), accounting for bias (e.g. Lulla 1978), documentation of basic participant demographics (Bennett 1974, 1976), proper statistical analysis and sufficient sample size (Boyce 2005, Uttley et al. 2019), and other details (Veitch et al. 2019, Inanici 2021). Experimental protocol should be pre-registered with all planning decisions (Fotios and Kent 2021). Thorough measurements that verify the performance of the apparatus/installation and experimental conditions before, after and during the data collection should be completed (e.g. Tyukhova 2015). The publication of datasets online is highly encouraged to allow further verification of the developed models by other researchers (Clear 2013, Abboushi and Miller 2024a). 
Careful consideration should be given to avoiding any biases, since all subjective evaluations are likely to be biased in some way (e.g. Poulton 1989). For example, Lulla (1978) and Lulla and Bennett (1981) demonstrated the stimulus range bias effect for the adjustment procedure (consistent with other sensory range effects) – observers set the BCD to a higher value when a larger luminance range was presented (higher maximum value), confirmed by a recent study (Kent et al. 2019b). To avoid this, Lulla and Bennett proposed to show only one luminance and ask whether it is above or below BCD or to demonstrate a representative range of values for a specific application (Bennett 1980). Fotios suggests using additional methods for glare evaluation such as a physiological or behavioral response (2018).  Many other common biases exist in discomfort glare assessments, but discussed elsewhere (Pierson et al. 2018, Kent et al. 2018, Kent et al. 2019c, Fotios and Kent 2021). A properly done experiment that follows best practice and accounts for biases should uncover useful insights into the studied phenomenon.
Subjective assessments will remain an essential component of studying discomfort glare since they capture a feeling in the context and preferences that are based on past experiences that other measurements cannot capture. Indeed, Boyce (2014) mentioned the subjective assessment captures the use of different criteria such as past experience for rating discomfort glare by observers. They put a model into the context of the application. It is important to acknowledge that the absolute rating cannot be extended to conditions outside of the experiment – this can only be done in a relative way.

2.2 Physiological and behavioral assessment of discomfort glare
Discomfort glare has also been studied with various physiological and behavioral measures in the past with an attempt to understand the underlying mechanisms, derive an objective glare measure, or at least improve the predictability. While physiological and behavioral measures are different, they are combined here because they both measure a response to the visual environment without explicitly asking the observers. 
Discomfort glare might cause various physiological reactions such as blinking, changes in pupil size, apparent changes in facial muscles, visual distraction, and others (Fugate 1957, Hopkinson 1956, Lynes 1977). In some cases, inclusion of these measures is an attempt to uncover the underlying cause of discomfort glare, therefore, other relevant applications are included here in addition to outdoor environments after dark. Among the physiological and behavioral responses to discomfort glare that were studied in the past are the following.
	Pupil response – absolute or relative change in pupil’s size, hippus (an involuntary spasm of the pupil) measured by photography or eye trackers (Hopkinson 1956, Fugate and Fry 1956, Fry and King 1975, Howarth et al. 1993; Stringham et al. 2011, Zhu et al. 2013, Jia 2014, Tyukhova 2015, Hamedani et al. 2020a). The absolute pupil diameter does not seem like a good predictor of discomfort glare, since it also depends on the luminance condition to which the eye is adapted (Hamedani et al. 2020b) and, on the factors other than light such as the observer’s age, accommodation, and mental load. The correlation between subjective evaluations of discomfort glare and the relative pupil diameter (the change of the pupil diameter from the initial state to the glare condition divided by the initial state) was R2 = 0.38, P < 0.001 in (Lin et al. 2015) and R2=0.434, P<0.0001 in (Tyukhova and Waters 2019).  
	Blink rate and amplitude, degree of eye opening (DEO) – the ratio between the level of the eye openness in the presence of a glare source and the maximum eye height when it is totally open measured by eye trackers, video (e.g. Hamedani et al. 2020a, 2020b). DEO showed good correlation with vertical illuminance at the eye (r=-0.503), and daylight glare indices (r=-0.580 to -0.649) (Yamin Garreton et al. 2015).
	Electrograms (EGM) – the recordings of electrical signal from the body, measured by monitoring changes in electric potential (proposed for discomfort glare as early as 1957 by Fugate). Among common EGMs in discomfort glare research are electromyographic (EMG) readings of the muscles around the eyes (Berman et al. 1994, Iodice et al. 2019) and the speed of the eye movement measured with an electrooculogram (EOG). EMG recordings showed a correlation with subjective responses (R2=0.659 to 0.817, p<0.001) (Murray et al. 2002). The eye movement was highly correlated with subjective assessments (R2 >0.94, P < 0.001) (Lin et al. 2015).
	Brain activity (functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI)) – blood-oxygen-level-dependent (BOLD) responses to glare stimuli for various brain regions (Bargary et al. 2015). An increased neural response to three light levels in the presence of a simple behavioral task was observed in a more glare sensitive group, even when the light level was below participants’ discomfort glare threshold. The magnitude of the response is positively correlated with discomfort glare sensitivity of an individual.
	Skin conductance response (Stanke et al. 2022). It depended significantly on the light of the oncoming vehicle, but it did not correlate with the subjective De Boer glare ratings. 
	Gaze behavior – measurement of the dominant gaze directions with a mobile eye tracker for capturing the luminance images for glare assessment, fixation rate (FR) and fixation duration (FD) (Hamedani et al. 2020a, 2020b). Gaze behavior is highly dependent on the type of visual task (Yamin Garreton et al. 2016, Sarey Khanie et al. 2017).
	An ‘adaptive zone’ concept accounts for occupants’ freedom to change the direction of view or position to minimize the discomfort glare (Jakubiec and Reinhart 2012, O’Brien and Gunay 2014). Applying the ‘adaptive zone’ concept reduces the predicted hours of intolerable discomfort glare in a side- and daylit office with manually operated venetian blinds.
	‘Glare Response Sensitivity (GRS) index’ survey quantifies an observer’s likelihood of experiencing discomfort from daylight glare and prompting a behavioral response (O’Neil 2015). GRS index has demonstrated that not only glare and lighting levels, but also spatial, personal, and social factors influence behavior.

Improvement of the sensor technology makes the use of measuring devices inexpensive and easy, and this leads to more frequent inclusion of physiological and behavioral measures in research of discomfort glare (Luo et al. 2023). However, they have not yet been used to create discomfort glare models. Some physiological measures show no or low correlation with discomfort glare (e.g. skin conductance response, absolute pupil diameter), others show confounding variables (e.g. gaze behavior with the type of task), while others are difficult to implement in the field (e.g. brain activity measurements, electrograms). Hamedani and others (2019) found that out of several physiological reactions they looked at (pupil size, eye movements, gaze direction, blink rate, and DEO), the relative pupil size is a ‘very promising’ measure of visual discomfort, while hippus, eye movements, and DEO require more research. Involuntary physiological responses do not guarantee accurate characterization of discomfort glare more than does subjective discomfort glare responses (CIE 2021). However, studying subjective and physiological/behavioral measures simultaneously might give a deeper insight into the humans’ responses to discomfort glare. In addition, these measures might aid in identifying important data for further analysis – for example, the wearable eye-tracking devices may identify where pedestrians are looking in a visual scene with and without glare with further focus on these critical viewing directions in subjective assessments.  

	Discomfort glare models in outdoor nighttime environments 
To determine a model that can be used in practice for pedestrian and resident applications, it is important to understand the background of these models. Below is a chronological summary of glare models for small, uniform, and then non-uniform sources developed specifically for outdoor nighttime environments with the inclusion of some indoor models for non-uniform sources. Road and vehicle lighting, indoor and daylight glare models will not be discussed here unless the model has been used in a pedestrian and resident study before. All models with definitions and applicable conditions are included in Table A in the Appendix. 
 
Figure 6. Discomfort glare model development methods. 
Derived models attempt to predict glare perception by a static observer with a fixed direction of view from a photometric and geometric description of the source and the visual scene, and in some cases observer characteristics such as age and eye color. There are two types of model development methods (Figure 6) – empirical with a psychophysical method (vast majority of the models were developed this way), and a method that includes available knowledge on the processing of the human visual system from other disciplines such as vision science. Models for uniform sources were developed with the empirical method (section 3.1), and the visual system-based approach was mostly applied to non-uniform sources (section 3.4). However, both methods can be used for any source type. Examination of machine learning techniques and neural network approaches is another area to explore for developing new discomfort glare models (e.g. Wagdy et al. 2020) but has not yet been used much in the field.  
Common features of empirical models for a single glare source are the source parameters (luminance, size, position), and background luminance (Boyce 2014). Most studies are conducted in the lab, and these data are fitted to the model equation. General formulation of discomfort glare (DG) that expresses subjective response on a numerical scale is the following:
DG=(L^a ω^b)/(L_b^c P^d )
	(1)
L – the source luminance, cd/m2
ω – the solid angle subtended by the eye by the source, sr
Lb – the background luminance, cd/m2
P – the position of the glare source in the field of view
a, b, c, d – the exponents 

Existing discomfort glare models are applicable to only a limited set of conditions and applications. Several models discussed below were developed and tested on only one study. This typically means they do not extend outside of limited conditions and cannot be generalized beyond the research study until validated further.
Human visual system-based models capture luminance images with further processing and analysis to get the ‘total’ amount of glare. Although complex, these models attempt to overcome the limited application conditions of the empirical models. These models rely on vision science and its progress – parts of these models can be updated as new knowledge becomes available. 
All reviewed models are abbreviated with the first 3 letters of the name and year (except CBE, GR, and UGRs). 

3.1 Discomfort glare models that do not consider non-uniformity. 
3.1.1 Model for assessing discomfort glare indoors including from small windows (Petherbridge and Hopkinson 1950) – Pet1950  
Petherbridge and Hopkinson’s goal was to obtain more detailed knowledge of the effect of discomfort glare. They studied the relationship between the glare source luminance and the background luminance and showed that an increase in background luminance reduces the level of discomfort glare up until a certain point. They also looked at the effects of the displacement angle of the glare source, number of the glare sources in the field of view, and immediate surround on the perception of glare. The authors represented the data by the glare constant that includes only three variables – luminance and apparent area of the glare source and background luminance (Equation A.1) and provides a “rough calculation of a glare effect”. This model was developed in the context of windows and other such indoor sources, but it has been compared to other models for pedestrian applications (Abboushi et al. 2024b) since it neglects the effect of eccentricity up to 50 degrees and might be fitting for this application with a free gaze. It is worth mentioning that Hopkinson completed a study in outdoor environments for drivers (1940), but so far it has not been used in pedestrian and resident studies. 

3.1.2 Motor Vehicle and Street Lighting Discomfort Glare Model (Schmidt-Clausen and Bindels 1974) – Sch1974 
The motor vehicle lighting model was developed to assess discomfort glare from automotive headlamps (Equation A.2), and it has been compared to other discomfort glare models in at least three pedestrian and other related studies (Villa et al. 2017a, Tyukhova and Waters 2018, Abboushi et al. 2024b). Schmidt-Clausen and Bindels investigated glare illuminance, adaptation luminance, the angle between the light source and the line of sight, and the number of sources in a scale model with a projection screen representing the road. The authors investigated up to five light sources simultaneously present in the field of view and concluded that it is possible to replace multiple glare sources by a single source located at the center of all glare sources. The model predicts discomfort glare ratings well for situations when subjects attempted to detect the onset of low reflectance off-axis targets (Boyce 2008), however, looking directly at the light source produces invalid glare ratings that approach infinity. 

	3 Cumulative Brightness Evaluation System for roadways and street lighting - CBE
Tests conducted in North America could not validate Glare mark (Keck and Odle 1975) – a discomfort glare model for roadways (CIE 1976). Therefore, several studies led by Bennett at Kansas State University have been conducted on model streets to find a method for discomfort glare estimation from multiple sources in street lighting. The Cumulative Brightness Evaluation (CBE) model (Equations A.3-A.4) was based on a series of different studies (these reports are published by Kansas State University). The CBE model has been recently included in a comparison with other glare models in at least one study of discomfort glare experienced by pedestrians (Villa et al. 2017b).  
The first study of the extensive experiments that led to the development of the BCD formula (and eventually to the CBE) was conducted by Bennett (1977) (e.g. Bennett 1979b, Anantha et al. 1982, Easwer et al. 1983, Hussain 1985, Hussain et al. 1985, Ganesh 1985, Liu 1989, Van Bommel 2015). The resulting equation for BCD (in fL) for a single, static source is the following (using conventional symbols):

〖BCD〗_fL=(40L_(b,fL)^0.3∙e^0.05θ)/ω^0.6 
	(2)
Lb – the background luminance, fL
θ – the source angle above the line of sight, deg
ω – the solid angle of the source, sr

Rubison and Bennett (1979) extended this prediction to an arbitrary percentile rather than just the average. Further, Bennett (1979b, c) extended this work to multiple, equally spaced and sized static sources. The author found that BCD is diminished in proportion to the logarithm of the number of sources (1979b). Based on research results from Kansas State University, Merle Keck of the Roadway Lighting committee (per suggestion by Glenn Fry) has produced the “cumulative brightness evaluation (CBE)” system for usage in roadway lighting designs. It is a method that allowed combining two or more light sources of different luminances, sizes, and locations into a single one (Keck 1991, Bennett 1979b, 1979c). It would predict whether the CBE of all sources in the field of view will be evaluated as larger or smaller than BCD.
Adrian (1991) confirms that a series of different experiments conducted by Bennett led to the development of the mathematical formulation of CBE for street lighting installations and roadways (Equations A.3-A.4 few errors corrected). However, he does not refer to any of Bennett’s publications but rather to an IES publication with the CBE recommendation. According to the IES, this recommendation has never been published, but it was presented at one of the committee meetings (no record of it has been found).  CBE was based on the concept of BCD and combined the effect of several sources. 
 
3.1.4 Outdoor Sports and Area Lighting Model (CIE 112-1994) - GR
Glare Rating (GR) model (Equations A.5-A.8) was developed for evaluation of glare in outdoor sports and area lighting since none existed for this application before. Models for road lighting and motorized traffic are not valid for this application due to the variable direction of view of the sports observers and different ranges of lighting levels and mounting heights. It has been compared to other discomfort glare models in at least two studies considering pedestrian application (Kohko et al. 2015, Tyukhova and Waters 2018).  
Van Bommel and colleagues’ study (1983) was one of the main studies that formed the basis for this glare evaluation formula. The authors investigated the quantitative relationship between lighting parameters in 140 different outdoor sports grounds and 3000 glare assessments made on a nine-point scale. The study showed that for a given observer position and viewing direction, below the eye level, the degree of glare depends on the equivalent veiling luminances produced by the luminaires (Lv1) and the environment (Lve). Since the veiling luminance has been used in disability glare assessments, the CIE report makes no distinctions between discomfort and disability glare. 

3.1.5 Luminaire Glare Restriction Formula for residential and pedestrian areas – CIE2000  
For residential and pedestrian areas CIE (2000) recommends limiting L·A0.5 – a product of the luminaire’s greatest luminance in a specific direction (Equation A.9) and the luminaire’s projected area to the power of 0.5 for different mounting heights. The report mentions that a pedestrian is likely to experience discomfort glare from an individual source close to the line of sight, especially in areas with lower mounting heights. For the given luminous intensity, the smaller the glare source area, the higher the glare sensation (Equation A.9, Van Bommel 2015). With increasing mounting height, the required limitation of the permissible luminous intensity of the glare source becomes less severe because of the farther location of light source from common directions of view. 
One of the main studies that became the basis for this formula was conducted by Caminada and van Bommel (1980, 1984). The formula in this study had a different exponent – LA0.25 than in the CIE document LA0.5. According to Wout van Bommel, the discrepancy comes from extensive discussions in CIE during which one of the authors learned about an independent study published in Danish that arrived at a similar formula LA0.5. It was adopted in their lighting residential streets standard. Because the difference between the exponents was not significant, the CIE adopted the exponent of 0.5 as well. The limits proposed in the CIE standard also differ from Caminada and van Bommel study (e.g. for the mounting height of 4 m in 1980 study the limit is 1260 cd/m, while in the CIE (2000) it is 4000 cd/m for 4.5 m). According to van Bommel, CIE raised the limits based on “the practical possibilities of limiting glare with the lamps and production possibilities available at that moment”. 

3.1.6 Unified Glare Rating small source extension for indoors (CIE 2002) –UGRs
 The CIE published a technical report with the Unified Glare Rating (UGR) formula for practical evaluation of discomfort glare in interiors that has been accepted internationally (CIE 1995). It is valid for ‘normal’ sources (ω= 0.0003-0.1 sr). However, because the UGR predicts intolerable glare for small sources of high luminance, the CIE proposed an extension for small sources (CIE 2002). Both UGR and UGR small source extension models were developed for interior lighting. However, they have been investigated for outdoor nighttime environments (Sawicki and Wolska 2015, Tyukhova 2015, Villa et al. 2017b). 
Research by Benz (1966), Paul (1997) and Paul and Einhorn (1999) led to the modification of the UGR formula for small sources. Paul (1997) tested whether the effective size of a small source should be expressed in terms of an effective solid angle (ωs) or an area (As) and found support for the area hypothesis. Glare from very small sources is determined by the luminous intensity (not luminance), and any source smaller than 0.005 m2 should be considered as of size of 0.005 m2 (effective area) when viewed off the line of sight in interior distances. The term L2ω in the UGR formula (Equation A.11) is replaced with 200×I2/R2 for small source (Equation A.10) based on the effective area of a small source. 

3.1.7 Outdoor Lighting Installation Models (Bullough et al. 2008 and 2011a) – Bul2008 and Bul2011 
A discomfort glare model for outdoor lighting installations solely based on illuminances (the illuminance from the light source(s), the surround illuminance, and the ambient illuminance) was proposed by Bullough and colleagues (2008). The authors found that illuminance as opposed to glare source luminance relates much more strongly to subjective judgments of discomfort glare in outdoor installations. They reported a goodness-of-fit r2 = 0.7 between the model predictions (Equation A.12-A.13) and the overall set of experimental data. The authors pointed out the simplicity of the model and its ability to predict discomfort glare in a wide range of outdoor lighting installations. It can be readily incorporated into conventional application software. This model allows professionals to overcome the limit of the Sch1974 formula when θ=0° and leads to the infinity which makes it impossible to predict discomfort glare for direct viewing, and overcoming the difficulty of using the Sch1974 formula in which the background luminance is assumed to be a single, uniform value, which is rarely the case.
This model assumes that the size or luminance of the glare source has no impact on discomfort glare. However, later Bullough (2011b) realized that this assumption might not be valid for closer viewing conditions and tested it with three LED array sources in a laboratory. In 2012, Bullough and Sweater Hickcox conducted two more experiments and found that for a light source of an angular size of 0.3º or more the 2008 glare model requires the inclusion of the glare source luminance to predict glare with the higher accuracy (Bullough et al. 2011a, Equation A.14).  
 
3.1.8 Model predicting discomfort glare from uniform LED road lights (Lin et al. 2014, 2015) – Lin2014 and Lin2015
The goal of the first study was to develop a discomfort glare model specifically for LED road lighting since models such as Sch1974, Bul2008, and Bul2011 were developed with previous technologies of light sources. The authors concluded that a uniform LED glare source is similarly affected by the same key parameters as a traditional light source except the parameters’ weighting coefficients. The developed model includes illuminance from the source (estimated as Lg*ω), background luminance, and viewing angle (Equation A.15). In verification experiments with different CCTs (5000, 6500K), they found that the higher color temperature resulted in more discomfort glare – by adjusting the constant in the model, they can predict discomfort glare of LED road lighting with other color temperatures. However, it needs further research. 	 
Lin and others found that the performance of this model developed for LEDs is very similar to the Sch1974 model developed for HID headlamps (correlation is 0.995). It is not clear why the authors had to develop a new model for LED sources before testing the existing model by Schmidt-Clausen and Bindels that showed good performance for Lin and colleagues’ data with the LED road lighting. 
 	In 2015 Lin et al. transformed model Equation A.15 to Equation A.16 using source and background illuminances rather than luminances based on the data in the newer study. They found significant correlation between the measured and predicted values for the young (R2=0.96, P < 0.001) and senior (R2=0.88, P < 0.001) groups. Both models were considered for pedestrians in Villa et al. (2017a) and Abboushi et al. (2024b).

 3.1.9 The limitation of the effects of obtrusive light from outdoor lighting installations – CIE 2017
CIE (2017) recommends limiting the luminous intensity of bright luminaires in the field of view in outdoor lighting installations to “tolerable levels” (Table A. 4). It also acknowledges the conflict between the need to illuminate the outdoor area and to limit the obtrusive effects of light and set the goal to be credible and pragmatic in application. It addresses the effects of the maintained direct view (not momentary) of bright luminaires on residents that cause annoyance, distraction, and discomfort in terms of luminous intensity in specified directions. The tolerable levels of luminous intensity (cd) depend on the following 4 factors: (1) the viewing distance to the source, (2) projected area of the source, (3) ambient lighting determined by five environmental zones (E0-E4), and (4) the times the lighting system is in operation (pre-curfew or post-curfew). The basis for the luminous intensity limits (Table A. 4) comes from studies in subjective glare evaluations – a few dealt with small sources in dark environments (Hopkinson 1957, Putnam and Faucett 1951, Luckiesh and Guth 1949, Bennett 1977). 

3.1. 10 Probabilistic discomfort glare model for LEDs in outdoor lighting (Girard et al. 2023) – Gir2023
Due to the high individual variability of the sensitivity to glare, Girard and others propose a probabilistic model of discomfort glare for outdoor environments that computes probability that an observer rates a given stimulus at each level of the rating scale (Equation A.20). They extended the discomfort glare formula for a multisource stimulus at the BCD level for the background of 1 cd/m2 (Girard et al. 2021a) to other discomfort levels and background luminances (Equation A.19). The first step is to compute the ‘Glare Excitation’ from the photometric and geometric parameters of the source(s). The next step is to compute the probabilities using four equations that an observer rates the stimulus at four levels of a scale (A-no glare, B-BCD, C-tolerable, D-hardly tolerable). It avoids averaging across discomfort levels for the ordinal scale that only provides ranking (psychological difference between two levels is unknown) and limits averaging across participants. It also includes up to 10 LED sources simultaneously. Model values might change depending on the task, spectrum, other spatial arrangements and if used outside of the tested ranges.
	
3.2 Discomfort glare models for non-uniform sources in outdoor nighttime environments
3.2.1 Model for white LED light sources with different spatial arrangements in outdoor conditions (Tashiro et al. 2015) – Tas2015  
The authors conducted 4 experiments with white LED sources that have different spatial luminance distributions in simulated outdoor conditions after dark of a pedestrian looking straight ahead. They found that for the same illuminance at the eye (or the same average luminance of the effective source area) a uniform source causes less glare than a non-uniform one. They also found that the pitch – can be defined either as a distance or as the visual angle between LEDs (as in this study) – for the same number of elements in a luminaire and the density of LEDs per fixed area did not affect discomfort glare ratings.
Based on all 4 experiments they concluded that illuminance at the eye is a good photometric quantity for predicting glare for non-uniform (or uniform) sources when viewed alone. However, when both uniform and non-uniform sources are compared together it is not a proper measure. To explain the difference between the uniform and non-uniform light sources, they introduced the weighting factor function for each pixel’s luminance. The authors modified the UGR equation using the effective glare luminance for LED light sources having different spatial luminance distributions in dark conditions (Equation A.21). 

 	3.2.2 Model for estimating discomfort glare from uniform and non-uniform sources in pedestrian zones for peripheral viewing (Kohko et al. 2015) – Koh2015 
	Kohko and colleagues investigated discomfort glare in pedestrian applications with seven types of streetlights (a mercury lamp, a fluorescent lamp, and 5 LED sources with various uniformity distributions) in an outdoor field that simulated a pedestrian zone. Observers used a category scale to rate glare when viewing light sources directly and peripherally (lighting conditions were not randomized). They proposed a discomfort glare equation (Equation A.23) based on a general formulation of glare (referencing Luckiesh and Guth 1949, Petherbridge and Hopkinson 1950) (Equation (1)) to assess glare in pedestrian zones from both uniform and non-uniform sources for peripheral viewing. No reason was provided on why the formula is only developed for peripheral viewing, since the experiment has also included the central viewing condition. In their formula they used Leff10 which is an effective luminance similar to the study by Tashiro and colleagues (2015). However, they do not specify if any weighting function is used in its calculation beyond saying that ‘Leff_10 is calculated as 1/10 or more of the maximum luminance’. Background luminance is completely omitted in the equation because they assumed it to be constant for all observing points in the study. 

3.3 Discomfort glare model for non-uniform sources in indoor environments (CIE 2019a) – CIE2019
The internationally accepted UGR model for indoor applications (Equation A.11, CIE 1995) underestimates discomfort from non-uniform luminaires such as LED sources. Several UGR modifications were developed to account for non-uniformity in indoor environments (e.g. Yang et al. 2017a, b, 2018 a, b, Ma et al. 2017). CIE (2019a) reached a consensus on a non-uniformity correction to UGR for indoor luminaires (Equation A.24-A.25) with further examples of luminance measurement setup in CIE (2023). It is worth mentioning this model, since non-uniformity is a big aspect of many LED luminaires in outdoor environments, and the existing approaches in this application might be relevant for future outdoor studies.
Four methods to modify UGR to account for non-uniformity were proposed – a correction of position index, average source luminance, observed luminous surface area, or a correction for the UGR formula as a whole. All approaches to correct the UGR formula could be expressed by including a dimensionless uniformity correction parameter k2. The authors tested various correction methods on subjective data of 4 groups (Tashiro et al., 2015, Hara and Hasegawa 2012 in Japanese, Yang et al., 2017a, b, 2018 a,b, Funke and Schierz, 2015; Funke 2017 in German). The effective area method agreed well with empirical data on perceived glare from non-uniform sources, covered worst-case scenario, introduced a minimum modification of the original UGR model and it can be easily implemented. It was noted, however, that it is not based on the underlying physiological or psychological mechanism. 

3.4 Discomfort glare models based on the human visual system
 Some studies started to include mechanisms of the human visual system processing for glare prediction. For example, Stone (2009) proposed a theoretical model that involved applying the gate control theory of pain to understand the strain caused in the visual system in excessive lighting conditions. Bargary et al. (2014) proposed a model based on the saturation of retinal transduction mechanisms to explain discomfort glare in the central vision. Wilkins (2016) found that the departure of the retinal image from natural scenes causes discomfort, and it is linked to an excess energy at spatial frequencies close to 3 cycles/degree. 
Other studies look at more practical frameworks that capture luminance images with further processing and analysis to get the ‘total’ amount of glare. For example, Donners and others (2015) used a mathematical ratio of Gaussians model of the retinal receptive field function to assess discomfort glare of office and road lighting luminaires. The resulting visual discomfort glare (VDG) model quantifies glare as well as the UGR model from uniform sources and better than the UGR for non-uniform sources. Scheir and others have applied their models based on receptive fields (2018) in glare studies with further inclusion of the pupillary light reflex and a correction for retinal position (2019). Safdar and colleagues (2018) proposed a neural response-based glare model (NRGM)) to predict discomfort glare based on the core concept of normalization. The model takes a luminance image as an input and through a series of steps that calculate local contrast, normalized local contrast, receptive and suppressive field maps among others gets the overall response (spikes/sec) that is correlated with observer ratings. In their study this model outperformed UGR for non-uniform luminaires. These models can be updated as new knowledge becomes available, so only the latest model developed by Vissenberg et al. (2023) is discussed below. 

3.4.1 A generic, visual system-based model for discomfort glare (Vissenberg et al. 2023) – Vis2023 
	The CIE committee (TC 3-57) is developing a general glare sensation (not perception) model based on the human visual system that includes available knowledge from optometry and neurology (Vissenberg et al. 2023). The idea is that the lit environment will generate a sensation in the human visual system quantifiable in physiological characteristics that is expected to be universal for all sources and applications. However, the authors mention that the interpretation of the sensation scale in terms of discomfort perception requires knowledge of psychological and contextual factors. A higher value on a glare scale indicates a higher sensation of glare, but not necessarily more perceived discomfort by an observer – it depends on the context. 
The main assumption in this generic glare model is that discomfort may be induced by the high metabolic demand by overstimulated cortical neurons (Wilkins et al. 1984). The model takes a luminous image of a single light source as an input along with other parameters such as source eccentricity, viewing distance, instantaneous and prolonged eye illuminances, observer age, and eye pigmentation. It includes aspects such as pupil constriction, retinal image formation, photoreceptor response and adaptation, receptive field-type filtering in the retina and neural spatial summation. All local neural responses are added up nonlinearly to define a glare sensation score (GSS). The model correlates well with glare responses in both applications – indoors for a single source simulated in Dialux in the office and outdoor study by Tashiro et al. (2015) for uniform and non-uniform sources. 
The model is calibrated using subjective data, and the authors defined GSS S=1.0 as a case when an observer in Luckiesh and Guth’s experiment (1949) would experience glare at BCD. Since it is a sensation model, in other conditions the BCD might be higher/lower than 1.0. It is not an absolute scale – the same GSS does not imply the same level of discomfort in different contexts (same as the UGR – a recommended value for corridor lighting is not appropriate for technical drawing work). Furthermore, the GSS=1.0 may be acceptable to one individual and very uncomfortable to another, because of the large individual variation in glare perception.
3.5 Model summary for pedestrian application 
Most common variables included in the models are the luminance and size of the glare source, its position, and background luminance. Illuminance at the eyes and luminous intensity are also common. The influence of SPD on discomfort glare has been discussed in many studies (e.g. Flannagan 1999, Bullough 2009, Fekete et al. 2010), but none of the outdoor models include its effect. All models predict a mean level of discomfort on a scale except for CBE that is not related to any glare scale and Gir2023 addresses observer variability by predicting probabilities at 4 different glare levels. 
All reviewed models were developed with a static observer and limited gaze. Many reviewed models were developed for various outdoor applications (except Pet1950, UGRs, CIE2019), and some specifically with small sources. Two models (Tah2015, Koh2015) proposed a non-uniformity modification to UGR in outdoor conditions after dark, CIE2019 for indoors, Vis2023 for general applications. Most models consider only 1 glare source (except CBE, CIE (1994, 2002) that sum up multiple sources). Sch1974 was developed with up to 5 sources in the field of view and Gir2023 with up to 10.
Discomfort glare can occur from a large saturation, strong contrast or both (Pierson et al. 2018). Saturation or absolute glare is when the total amount of light reaching the observer’s eyes is too large, and it is hard to adapt to the lighting conditions despite a good contrast of the source and background. Contrast or relative glare is when the contrast between the viewing direction (e.g. low luminance visual task or background) and the bright light source is too strong. Reviewed glare formulas and measures consider different effects depending on the equation’s structure such as strong contrast (e.g. Pet1950), large saturation (e.g. illuminance at the eye) or both (e.g. Bul2008). 

	Comparison of discomfort glare models and measures for static or slow-moving observers
	A model cannot be generalized beyond the research study if it was developed and tested on only one study as several models above. Some new models created on new datasets (Lin2014 and Yang et al. 2017b for indoors) perform just as well as the existing ones (Sch1974 and Tas2015 respectively), which essentially extends the validity of the original models. However, no guidance is available on which model should be used.
Several researchers compared a few discomfort glare models and photometric measures on independent datasets to determine which model performs more accurately in nighttime environments related to pedestrians (Table 1). Kohko and colleagues (2015) studied LED lighting in pedestrian zones and reported goodness of fit (R2) for Ed (0.70; 0.53) and for Lavg (0.8; 0.81) for central and peripheral viewing respectively. They compared a few models to subjective evaluation collected in their study. The authors showed that luminance-based photometric quantities (R2=0.83; 0.81 for Leff) are a better measure of discomfort glare than the illuminance at the eye with both uniform and non-uniform sources for both central and peripheral viewing. Kohko and others also developed a model based on their dataset (section 3.2.2)
In a laboratory study with a spherical apparatus simulating outdoor environment after dark, Tyukhova (2015) found that within tested variables (Table 1) UGRs correlates most accurately with the subjective assessments (r = 0.88). It is significantly better than the second highest correlation (r = 0.86) found for the combination of Bul2008 and Bul2011 models. Some of the UGRs values in the experiment exceeded the maximum value of 30, which might be explained by the different range of conditions used in the study as compared to the interior environments. In a laboratory experiment with a non-uniform outdoor luminaire, Spieringhs et al. (2022) made a similar observation when applying UGR after dark. 
In a pedestrian field study, Villa and others (2017a) tested how the models predict the absolute level of discomfort (global deviation) with the root mean square error (RMSE), and in terms of relative predictions (ranking) with Spearman R2. They found that the Lin2015 model underestimates discomfort glare, while the other three models overestimate it. Overall, Lin2015 (R2=0.75; 0.78, RMSE= 0.6; 0.81) and Bul2011 (R2=0.65; 0.72; 0.73 and RMSE=1.27; 1.13; 1.30) performed well in urban pedestrian settings – a few values for R2 and RMSE represent different definitions of the background. The authors have also reported high Spearman’s rho coefficients for Ed (0.72 for a single lantern source) and Lavg (0.74 for a single LED module). In 2017(b) Villa and others found that UGR overestimates glare compared to their experimental data and performs only better than Lin2014, but worse than all other models tested before. This is most likely because it was developed for interiors with higher background luminances. In terms of relative assessment, the UGR and the De Boer ratings were correlated (R2=0.69; 0.7 for lantern and LED module respectively). The logarithm of CBE performed well (R2 is in the range of 0.64-0.83 based on LED module and lantern sources and CBE Bennett and CBE Adrian formulas). The conversion equation from CBEtol to the De Boer ratings was proposed based on data from this study and needs further investigations.  

Table 1. Comparison studies of discomfort glare models after dark
		Studies*
	K2015	T2015	V2017(a, b)	A2023
Data set	1	1	1	4**
Subjective scale 	1 – not dazzling
2
3 – somewhat dazzling
4
5 – dazzling
6
7 – very dazzling 
8
9 – unbearable	0–No discomfort glare
1–Between nonexistent and noticeable
2–Noticeable
3–Between noticeable and disagreeable
4–Disagreeable
5–Between disagreeable and intolerable
6–Intolerable	De Boer (translated into French)
1–Unbearable (Insupportable)
2
3–Disturbing (Dérangeant)
4
5–Just admissible (Supportable)
6
7–Satisfactory (Acceptable)
8
9–Unnoticeable (Négligeable)	De Boer or transformed to De Boer scale (different labels depending on the dataset, but 1-unbearable and 9-unnoticeable in all)

Number of participants	19 (8 females)	47 (16 females)	33 (19 females)	155 (summed up across 4 studies) (68 females)
Number of experimental conditions	42	36	64 (static protocol)
8 (dynamic protocol)	438 (summed up across 4 studies)
Number of sources	1 	1	1 or 2 	1
Lab/field 	Field (simulating pedestrian zone)	Lab	Field (static or dynamic protocol, simulating pedestrian zone) 	Both 
L, cd/m2	Lave_10+ =3,800 – 230,800	20,000; 205,000; 750,000	400-152,000 (LED module)
238-29,800 (lantern)	1.56-766,440
Lb, cd/m2	–	0.03, 0.3, or 1	0.034-0.637 (disc or road zone)	0-10
ω, sr	0.057·10−3 – 1.5·10−3	10−5; 10−4	0.00044-0.0082 (lantern)
0.000052-0.003 (LED module)	10−5 -8.2·10−3
Eccentricity, degrees	0; 5-40	0; 10	22-62 (1 luminaire)
9-21 (2 luminaire)	0-62
Source non-uniformity	Both	Uniform	Non-uniform	Both
Viewing (direct, indirect, both)	Both (central 2s)	Both (momentary 3 flashes 1.2s)	Indirect	Both
CCT, K	3900-5200	5700	4000	4000-6500
Tested models 	Leff 
Lave_10 
Lmax
Edirect
GR	UGRs 
Bul2008&2011 
Sch1974 
GR	2017a:
Lin2015
Edir/Eind (simplified Bul2011)
Bul2011
Edirect
Lmax
Sch1974
Lin2014	2017b:
CBE
CBE (Adrian’s form) UGR
	Bul2008 
Edirect 
Lin2015
Lin2014 
Sch1974
Pet1950 
Lave
*Studies K2015 (Kohko et al. 2015); T2015 (Tyukhova 2015, Tyukhova and Waters 2018); V2017(a, b) Villa et al. (2017a, b); A2023 (Abboushi et al. 2024b) 
**Data from Villa et al. 2017a; Sweater Hickcox et al. 2013; Tyukhova and Waters 2018, Tyukhova 2015; Tashiro et al. 2015
+ Average luminance of light-emitting part of luminaires (1/10 or more of max luminance), cd/m2
Abboushi and others (2024b) tested performance of seven models on four independent data sets with diagnostic tests based on receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curve in a context of pedestrian outdoor application. Overall, Bul2008 performed well (R2=0.78) but due to the difficulty of measuring illuminances in the model, the authors favor the direct illuminance at the eye – the next best measure (R2=-0.69). They conclude that a simpler approach might be sufficient for assessing discomfort glare in outdoor nighttime environments. The authors recommend including other models (e.g. Bul2011) and conditions (e.g. more sources, dynamic protocol, etc.) for further testing.  
	Measurement challenges of glare-relevant parameters in the field 
	One of the limiting factors for glare model implementation in practice is the measurement of glare-relevant parameters. Models require definitions of various variables or luminance images with the relevant resolution (CIE 2019a, 2023). When using glare formulae, there is no agreement on what constitutes a glare source (therefore, its luminance, size, and background surrounding the source), especially the non-uniform sources. Luminous elements can contribute either to glare or adaptation or both. In addition, qualified professionals and suitable equipment is needed to do these measurements (LiTG 2011). 
 
Figure 7. Measurement of a non-uniform source with a luminance meter (left) and a camera with the HDRI method (right)
Luminance measurements most commonly can be done with a hand-held luminance meter,  Imaging Luminance Measurement Devices (ILMD) or high dynamic range imaging (HDRI). However, there is no standard way to measure luminance and area of the LED luminaires. It is difficult to measure the luminance of individual LEDs because of their small size and very high intensity (Tyukhova and Waters 2014). The circular luminance meter’s acceptance area should fit inside the source, but also cover as much of it as possible. If the luminous part of the glare source is small, the alignment of the measuring area of the luminance meter with a close-up lens and the luminous area is difficult and not always possible (Figure 7 left) even in laboratory conditions (e.g. Tyukhova 2012, 2015). Tyukhova (2012) found that the HDRI method can be used for measuring a single LED chip as compared to a traditional, labor-intensive method through the direct illuminance measurement in the lab and subsequent calculations. The HDRI method allows to get a map of luminance values of the whole scene for further analysis as opposed to a single or few measurements with a luminance meter (Figure 7).
If one measures a non-uniform LED source with a luminance meter, it only provides an average luminance of the luminaire (Figure 7 left). ILMDs and HDRI are frequently used for capturing source’s non-uniformity, however, there are many challenges. There is accuracy decrease in measurements of the maximum luminance of LEDs with ILMD with the distance due to the averaging of LED chip and its surroundings by the measurement area (Słomiński et al. 2016, Villa et al. 2017a). Sometimes the range of LED luminances is too large even for the luminance camera with neutral density filters (Yang et al. 2017b). Methods such as capturing the luminance image at the lowest setting and scaling it up with the ratio of the illuminances measured for each experimental level and at the lowest setting can be used in this case. It assumes that the luminance distributions were kept constant. CIE (2023) published examples of luminance measurement setup specifically for calculating UGR of non-uniform sources to further assist practitioners. However, many questions remain such as the necessary resolution of the image to capture the glare sources.
Measurement of the luminaire area (and its solid angle) for non-uniform sources is closely related to the luminance measurements. Determination of what constitutes source or background, especially in HDR luminance maps is not straightforward (Clear 2013, Słomiński 2016). For non-uniform sources the area calculation from luminance maps highly depends on the combination of the individual pixels, and therefore, the estimation of glare index such as UGR (Scheir et al. 2015). Kohko and colleagues (2015) noted the difficulty of extracting a luminaire area from a luminance image for light sources at different distances because the absolute pixel area largely varies. They used 1/10 or more of the maximum luminance as one of the methods to determine the effective luminance. CIE (2019a) adopted 500 cd/m2 threshold to define the source (Scheir et al. 2017). This value will not be valid for outdoors due to different conditions just as the resolution of the luminance map determined for indoors.   
Background luminance is quite ambiguous and rarely uniform in the outdoor environment – it might include roads, buildings, night sky, trees, and signs (Schmidt-Clausen and Bindels 1974, Kohko et al.2015, Spieringhs et al. 2022). Background area is not clearly defined (Pierson et al. 2018), although many researchers have used various areas in different shapes around the source or the road zone (e.g. 10, 20, 30° in Girard et al. 2023, Tyukhova 2015, Villa et al. 2017a respectively). Bullough and others made a distinction between the ambient and the surround illuminance (2008). Putnam and Faucett (1951) and Hopkinson (1957) have also separated the effect of the immediate surround from the adaptation luminance. It is important to specify what is used in any given study (Abboushi et al. 2024a). 
	 Luminous intensity is typically provided by the luminaire manufacturers, and it can be verified with the illuminance measurement and the known distance between the observer and the source (CIE 2017). While illuminance is much easier to measure in the field (Inanici 2021), specific components such as the ambient, surround, or the direct illuminance from the light source (Bullough et al. 2008) require a specialized approach. For example, the direct illuminance can be measured with a carefully aimed highly absorbent black tube (Figure 8), and the surround (reflected) illuminance in two ways – (1) by using the occluder/baffle that blocks the direct component of light from the given glare source with other ambient source(s) being turned off (Figure 8 left), or (2) by subtracting the direct and the ambient illuminances from the total (Figure 8 right) (e.g. Tyukhova 2015). Some approximations of these illuminances might be more practical in the field since it is not always possible to isolate different components.  
 
Figure 8. Measuring illuminance components for the Bul2008 and Bul2011 models. 
This section shows that a lot of questions exist on how to measure glare-related parameters in the real world. It is important, because the method used for the parameter calculation in the glare model might affect glare calculations, however, it is unclear to what extent, and it needs further research. Safdar and others (2018) mention that physiology-based models avoid problems with defining LED luminance, area, and contrast, since they use a luminance image as an input. Vissenberg argues that the implementation problems discussed here will be solved as the HDRI/ILMD technology will be improved. However, rigorous protocols are needed for not only the measurement of the quantities such as luminance of a non-uniform source to allow for standard definition of glare-relevant parameters and consistency among the studies, but also for specifications of the luminous maps. 

	Discussion
Sixteen models for pedestrians and residents in outdoor environments after dark and other related applications were reviewed along with research on discomfort glare (Table A). Some of the barriers to model acceptance for this application and glare research in general are the variety of scales used in the studies and the difficulty of establishing correspondence rules between them, definition and implementation of glare-related variables in the real world, limited conditions of the formulas that do not characterize pedestrian application, and lack of sufficient research for important aspects of this application such as non-uniformity, dynamic viewing, and variable gaze. 
5.1 Methodology and measurement
All reviewed models were developed almost exclusively using a subjective method, most commonly a 9-point category rating scale or an adjustment procedure to BCD. The exception is the generic discomfort glare model Vis2023. However, it was still calibrated using the subjective data from Luckiesh and Guth (1949). Category scale labels even for the same scale such as De Boer can be different in different studies (e.g. Schmidt-Clausen and Bindels 1974, Bullough et al. 2011a) or not listed at all (e.g. Lin et al. 2014). When the variety of scales are used it is difficult to compare the models, because the correspondence rules between them must be established and the assumptions are not straightforward (e.g. Villa et al. 2017b). A robust and valid scale development for glare assessment is an important step for further research.  
Psychological assessments are important in glare model development and validation because they put the sensation of glare into the context of application (e.g. range of conditions, task, observer characteristics). Gellatly and Weintraub (1990) have pointed out that subjects might agree on the magnitude of discomfort but disagree whether it is acceptable or not. Among the factors that cause response variability are the discrimination of comfort from discomfort determined by the characteristics of the visual system, and variation in acceptability affected by experience, attitude, expectations – all context dependent (Boyce 2014, Boyce and Wilkins 2018). Following the latest guidance on methodology and avoiding bias is critical for capturing reliable subjective responses in the studies of discomfort glare.
Ambiguity in characterization of the glare source and its environment prevents easy comparison between study results, consistent measurements, and development and adoption of a discomfort glare model. The development of measurement methods and standards that are replicable and readily employable in the field is needed to better understand and quantify the response to discomfort glare. In addition, it is unclear the extent of the influence of key glare-relevant variables on the actual glare calculations and needs further understanding. For example, Spieringhs et al. (2022) investigated a non-uniform outdoor luminaire in the lab and showed differences (within 12.3%) in UGR calculations when used 3 different measurement methods. Villa et al. (2017a) showed that background and source definition did not change the models’ predictions for outdoor pedestrian field study, but the accuracy of the models for high glare levels might be impacted by the measurement uncertainties. 
5.2 Factors affecting discomfort glare that need further investigation 
Almost all models were developed in a laboratory with a limited gaze direction and a static observer. However, in this application pedestrians are moving along the path and dynamically observing their environment in a large field of view (e.g. Villa et al. 2017a, Rahm and Johansson 2018, Markvica et al. 2019). Bullough and others (2003) showed that in a study with headlamps there was less glare in a free-gaze experiment than in a fixed-gaze one, although the effect size is relatively small. Also, in a dynamic protocol but with a fixed gaze discomfort glare assessed globally after a short walk was rated lower than in a static protocol (Villa et al. 2017a). The dynamic effects have also been investigated in some driver-related studies (Bennett 1983, Girard et al. 2021b). While the visual tasks of pedestrians were analysed with the eye tracking technology (e.g. Davoudian and Raynham 2012, Jiang et al. 2021), further research is needed on understanding pedestrian gaze behavior in comfortable and uncomfortable lighting conditions while moving and accounting for the type of task.  
In outdoor environments disagreement exists on how much source non-uniformity affects discomfort glare perception for direct and indirect viewing. Some studies show that the luminance pattern or retinal illuminance has an effect in the direct view (Donners et al. 2015, Kohko et al. 2015, Bargary et al. 2014), and in indirect view as well when considering both uniform and non-uniform sources (Tashiro et al. 2015, Kohko et al. 2015). In contrast, Donners et al. (2015) showed that in the indirect view glare depends on the total intensity of the source. Abboushi et al. (2024b) went further and combined datasets with various conditions including those that have direct and indirect viewing of both uniform and non-uniform sources and found that Bullough et al.’s (2008) model and the direct illuminance at the eye perform well for glare assessments without any source luminance information. Further research into when the non-uniformity within the source begins to matter for various source sizes and its relation to the viewing direction (direct/indirect) in outdoor environments after dark is needed. CIE (2019a) mentions that for streetlight conditions, the subjects cannot resolve LED spots at glare angles greater than 10 degrees. More fundamental knowledge of the relevant eye resolution for given viewing conditions will help interpret the luminance distribution correctly and determine when it matters in outdoor environments after dark. 
There seems to be some agreement that discomfort glare from a small source depends on the luminous intensity or illuminance rather than luminance (Petherbridge and Hopkinson 1950, LITG 2011, Rea 2018). Interestingly, two models vary based on the change in source size (0.0003 sr in CIE 1995, 2002 and 0.3 degrees in Bul2008 and Bul2011. Although Abboushi et al. (2024b) showed that using Tyukhova and Waters (2018) dataset with half glare sources above 0.3° and half below (all uniform small sources) – Bullough et al. (2008) performs similarly well for both sizes calling into question this size separation. The size and conditions when luminance information (including the non-uniformity) is necessary needs further research.     
5.3 Model comparisons and future research needs
A famous aphorism attributed to George Box (1976) goes “all models are wrong, but some are useful”. To implement a useful model Boyce and Beckstead (1991) recommend finding what captures the most variance in the glare ratings for a given application, recognizing the model limits, and working towards accepting the model. From a practical standpoint a model should meet several criteria such as being simple, valid, reliable, and accurate. Drawing conclusions about performance of a model based on one study can be problematic, since the range of variables might inadvertently favor one model over the other (Abboushi et al. 2024b). Vos (2003) warned of making serious mistakes if a formula is applied outside of its intended domain of validity. It might, however, still provide a reasonable estimation of glare for practical purposes for conditions similar to the ones it was developed with. Models that were developed based on multiple studies (CIE 1995, CIE 2017), studies that compare multiple models on new independent datasets (e.g. Tyukhova 2015, Villa et al. 2017a, b), on multiple datasets (e.g. Wienold et al. 2019, Abboushi et al. 2024b), or include additional measures (e.g. physiological) that capture objective responses show more promise. Studies conducted in the field are more generalizable (Villa et al. 2017 a, b), although might have unknown confounding variables such as weather, noise level, and traffic.  
Several models were compared for this type of application in a few studies (Table 1). Bul2008 model that includes both contrast and saturation terms performed best in the overall dataset of 4 studies among 6 other models (Abboushi et al. 2024b). This finding is similar to a cross-validation study of 22 daylight models with 7 datasets (Wienold et al. 2019) that found that the most robust and best-performing metric combined both effects. Overall, illuminance-based models such as a simple photometric measure of direct illuminance at the eye, Bul2008 and Lin2015 models performed well and, in some cases, better than luminance-based models (Abboushi et al. 2024b, Villa et al. 2017a, Tyukhova and Waters 2018). If one source type is viewed indirectly and alone (only uniform or non-uniform) it can be described well with a measure such as illuminance at the eye (Tashiro et al. 2015). 
A simple measure such as illuminance at the eye can be attractive for measuring glare when glare is experienced by one source at a time as some studies suggest. For example, CIE (2000) indicates that an individual light source has the most significant contribution to glare, and if a second source is at least 9° away from the line of sight it does not impact glare (Bullough et al. 2008). In their ‘static’ protocol, Villa and others (2017a) confirmed that pedestrians feel glare from the closest luminaire one at a time. Several models do not deal with multiple sources (e.g. Lin2014, Bul2008), and in this case some researchers use the additivity assumption for calculations (e.g. Villa et al. 2017a). Some studies (e.g. Viliūnas et al. 2014) investigate subjective factors that influence the perception of intelligent outdoor lighting installations with multiple light sources. However, this needs to be further assessed in relation to glare in the environment with multiple sources and relevant pedestrian directions of view as indicated in 5.2. 
In contrast to illuminance-based models, Kohko et al. (2015) and Tashiro et al. (2015) demonstrated that luminance-based photometric quantities are a better measure of discomfort glare with both uniform and non-uniform sources such as those installed at lower mounting heights. Other models that include luminance information such as Bul2011 performed well in outdoor applications (Villa et al. 2017a, in combination with Bul2008 in Tyukhova and Waters 2018). Only a limited set of models were assessed as compared to many more potentially relevant models discussed here (section 3). These models need to be assessed on multiple datasets that characterize pedestrian and resident application. In addition, discomfort glare needs to be assessed with multiple uniform and non-uniform sources in the field of view to validate best performing model in real world conditions.
There is a growing tendency to build a universal model that includes both indoor and outdoor applications. In 2003, Vos showed similarities between the discomfort glare indoor UGR metric and glare control mark (G) – a road lighting metric. Donners et al. (2015) proposed a receptive field model applicable to both office and road lighting applications. Vissenberg et al. (2023) proposed a model based on the human visual system to estimate glare that is applicable to a wide range of conditions and applications. However, these models have their own limitations such as complexity (until automated) and they are still calibrated using a subjective scale. As suggested by the authors, this complexity should not be compared to a single simplified glare formula but the whole conflicting set of formulae with overlapping application ranges and with many applications missing. Existing glare models do not explain the underlying reason for experiencing glare. These vision-based models offer a potential for understanding the mechanisms of glare as physiological processes in the human visual system can be incorporated into the model when new knowledge becomes available. These models should be compared to other models and assessed in field studies to assess their performance.
	Conclusions
A wealth of information on discomfort glare research exists that started since the beginning of the last century. This review summarizes studies on discomfort glare research, models, methodologies, and measurement. There have been many discomfort glare models developed for outdoor applications after dark, small and non-uniform sources, but none is widely accepted. This review synthesizes available studies to propose the following guidance for future research: 
	Sixteen models for pedestrians and residents in outdoor environments after dark and other related applications were reviewed along with research on discomfort glare (Table A). Recognizing the limits and working towards accepting the model for this application is an important step for practical application. 
	Multiple scales and the difficulty of establishing correspondence rules between them prevent effective comparisons between studies and the adoption of glare models in practice. Development of a robust and valid scale for glare assessment is a critical step. 
	The psychological component is an essential part of the glare experience that accounts for contextual factors, preferences, and knowledge. Proper methodology, analysis, and reporting of all methods, variables, and measurements is essential for capturing credible and reliable data.  
	Development of replicable and easily employable methods and standards that guide the measurement of the quantities such as luminance of a non-uniform source and luminous maps specifications is needed for consistency of studies and adoption of discomfort glare models. It is important to understand the extent of the influence of key glare-relevant variables on the actual glare calculations. 
	Gaze behavior for slow-moving observers in comfortable and uncomfortable situations should be investigated for better understanding of the impact of glare in a dynamic gaze and movement application. 
	The effects of source non-uniformity in direct/indirect viewing conditions (informed by studies of gaze behavior) for different source sizes in outdoor environments after dark need to be investigated. More fundamental knowledge of the relevant eye resolution for given viewing conditions will help interpret the luminance distribution correctly and determine when it matters in outdoor environments after dark. 
	Available models should be verified by multiple researchers on various independent data sets that include multiple uniform and non-uniform sources in controlled and real outdoor environments.
	Complex human vision discomfort glare models incorporate physiological processes of glare sensation, but they do not yet describe the link between glare sensation and discomfort perception – this needs further research. These models should be compared with other existing models and assessed in field studies. 
